README.md, before:

# still

`still` is a program for validating tabular data from CSV, TSV, and Excel.

## Quick Start

Generate a schema. Directives start with `@` and refer to global options. These are followed by column names and test expressions.

__`cars.schema`__

```yaml
@separater TAB
mpg: is_numeric()
cyl: range(2,8)
hp: is_positive() && range(10, 500)
vs: is(0) || is(1)
am: any(0, 1)
```

Then run the command line tool:

```
still validate cars.schema cars.tsv
```

# Test Expressions

## Vector Functions

## Utility Functions

Utility functions operate at the row level.

##### `if_else(condition, expr_if_true, expr_if_false)`

The `if_else` function evaluates an expression and returns `expr_if_true` or `expr_if_false` depending on the evaluation of `condition`.

```yaml
column: if_else(column == "AB1", height > 50, height < 50)
```

##### `max(...)`

Returns the max of arguments passed; Operates at the __row__ level.

```
orders: max(1,2,3) == 3         # Returns 3 == 3; true
items: max(col1, col2, col3)    # Returns the max value for the given row of col1-3.
inventory: max(col1)            # This does not return the max for an entire column; col1 is a scaler value.
```

##### `min(...)`

Returns the minimum of arguments passed; Operates at the __row__ level.

## Test Functions

### Background

Test functions all return a boolean (true/false) and allow you to evaluate conditions on a column. For brevity, they are implicitely passed the specified column when none is specified. For example:

```
status: contains("# NOTE")
# Converted to:
status: contains(status, "# NOTE")
```

You can still be explicit when referencing the column of interest, and you can also combine test functions using different columns:

```
status: contains("# NOTE") && contains(color, "red")
# Converted to:
status: contains(status, "# NOTE") && contains(time, "# NOTE")
```

### Basic

##### `is(value)`

Tests whether a value matches.

```yaml
color: is("red")
```

##### `not(value)`

Tests whether a value does not match.

```yaml
is_passed: not("fail")
```

### Sets

##### `any(...)`

Tests whether a value matches any of passed arguments.

```yaml
color: any("red", "blue", "green")
```

### Numbers

##### `range(lower, upper)`

Tests whether a value falls between `lower` and `upper` inclusive.

```yaml
rating: range(0,10)
```

##### `is_positive()`
##### `is_negative()`

Tests whether a value is positive or negative.


### Strings

##### `contains(substr)`

Tests for the presence of a substring in a value.

##### `regex(expression)`

Tests whether a value matches a regular expression.

##### `uppercase()`

Tests whether a value is all uppercase.

##### `lowercase()`

Tests whether a value is all lowercase.

##### `length(low, high = None)`

Tests for string length in a given column.

```yaml
# Test for exact length match
column: length(10)

# Test for minimum length
column: length(10, "*")

# Test for range of lengths
column: length(10, 20)
```

##### `is_url()`

Tests whether a string is a valid URL

#### Types

##### `is_numeric()`
##### `is_int()`

Test for numeric or integer values.

##### `is_bool()`__

Tests that column contains `true`, `TRUE`, `false`, or `FALSE`

#### Dates

##### `is_date()`__

Checks whether a value is date-like using strict criteria. `is_date()` will fail on ambiguous date strings. For example, `02/03/2020` is interpretted differently in Europe vs. the US but `2020-02-03` is not.

##### `is_date_relaxed()`__

Checks whether a value is date-like with potential ambiguity. `02/03/2020` would pass.

##### `is_date_format(format)`__

Check whether a column matches a specified date format. Formats can be specified as any date like this:

```
September 17, 2012, 10:10:09
oct. 7, 70
8/8/1965 12:00:00 AM
2006-01-02T15:04:05+0000
2014-04-26
```

```
date_of_birth: is_date_format("June 10, 1987")
```

See [araddon/dateparse](https://github.com/araddon/dateparse/blob/master/example/main.go#L12) for more examples.

__Important!__ You need to escape date values containing dashes using brackets (`[]`) or a double backslash (`\\`). For example `2020-02-10` is escaped like this:

```yaml
collection_date: is_date_format("[2020-02-10]")
collection_date: is_date_format("2020\\-02\\-10")
```

#### Files

##### `file_exists()`

Checks whether a file exists

##### `file_min_size(fsize)`

Checks whether a file is a minimum size

```yaml
photo: file_min_size("1MB")
```

`fsize` is a size string such as `100 mb`, `1G`, or `500`.

##### `mimetype(type)`

Validates the mimetype for a given file. See [gabriel-vasile/mimetype](https://github.com/gabriel-vasile/mimetype/blob/master/supported_mimes.md) for available mimetypes.

```yaml
photo: mimetype("image/jpeg")
```

## Notes

`still` is largely influenced by [csv-validate](http://digital-preservation.github.io/csv-validator/), but offers more flexibility when validating tabular data.

Commit message:

add count and unique functions

README.md, after:

# still

`still` is a program for validating tabular data from CSV, TSV, and Excel.

## Quick Start

Generate a schema. Directives start with `@` and refer to global options. These are followed by column names and test expressions.

__`cars.schema`__

```yaml
@separater TAB
mpg: is_numeric()
cyl: range(2,8)
hp: is_positive() && range(10, 500)
vs: is(0) || is(1)
am: any(0, 1)
```

Then run the command line tool:

```
still validate cars.schema cars.tsv
```

# Test Expressions

## Utility Functions

Utility functions operate at the row level.

##### `if_else(condition, expr_if_true, expr_if_false)`

The `if_else` function evaluates an expression and returns `expr_if_true` or `expr_if_false` depending on the evaluation of `condition`.

```yaml
flavor: if_else(flavor == "Chocolate", sugar > 50, sugar < 50)
```

##### `max(...)`

Returns the max of arguments passed; Operates at the __row__ level.

```
orders: max(1,2,3) == 3         # Returns 3 == 3; true
items: max(col1, col2, col3)    # Returns the max value for the given row of col1-3.
inventory: max(col1)            # This does not return the max for an entire column; col1 is a scaler value.
```
 
##### `min(...)`

Returns the minimum of arguments passed; Operates at the __row__ level.

## Test Functions

### Background

Test functions all return a boolean (true/false) and allow you to evaluate conditions on a column. For brevity, *all* test functions are implicitely passed the column being evaluated as the first argument. For example:

```
status: contains("# NOTE")
# Converted to:
status: contains(status, "# NOTE")
```

You can still be explicit when referencing the column of interest, and you can also combine test functions using different columns:

```
status: contains("# NOTE") && contains(color, "red")
# Converted to:
status: contains(status, "# NOTE") && contains(time, "# NOTE")
```

### Basic

##### `is(value)`

Tests whether a value matches.

```yaml
color: is("red")
```

##### `not(value)`

Tests whether a value does not match.

```yaml
is_passed: not("fail")
```

### Sets

##### `any(...)`

Tests whether a value matches any of passed arguments.

```yaml
color: any("red", "blue", "green")
```

##### `unique(...)`

Tests whether a column is unique.

```yaml
items: unique()
# You can also test that a set of columns are unique.
color: unique(color, size, weight)
```

*note* - `unique` will not work well on large datasets. It stores a hash digest of the arguments to test for uniqueness.

##### `count(...)`

Returns the number of times the passed values have been observed.

```yaml
color: count(color) <= 20 # Fails if a value is observed more than 20x times.
configuration: count(color, size) <= 10 # Fails if the combination of values is observed more than 10 times.
```

*note* - `unique` will not work well on large datasets. It stores a hash digest of the arguments to test for uniqueness.

### Numbers

##### `range(lower, upper)`

Tests whether a value falls between `lower` and `upper` inclusive.

```yaml
rating: range(0,10)
```

##### `is_positive()`
##### `is_negative()`

Tests whether a value is positive or negative.


### Strings

##### `contains(substr)`

Tests for the presence of a substring in a value.

##### `regex(expression)`

Tests whether a value matches a regular expression.

##### `uppercase()`

Tests whether a value is all uppercase.

##### `lowercase()`

Tests whether a value is all lowercase.

##### `length(low, high = None)`

Tests for string length in a given column.

```yaml
# Test for exact length match
column: length(10)

# Test for minimum length
column: length(10, "*")

# Test for range of lengths
column: length(10, 20)
```

##### `is_url()`

Tests whether a string is a valid URL

#### Types

##### `is_numeric()`
##### `is_int()`

Test for numeric or integer values.

##### `is_bool()`__

Tests that column contains `true`, `TRUE`, `false`, or `FALSE`

#### Dates

##### `is_date()`__

Checks whether a value is date-like using strict criteria. `is_date()` will fail on ambiguous date strings. For example, `02/03/2020` is interpretted differently in Europe vs. the US but `2020-02-03` is not.

##### `is_date_relaxed()`__

Checks whether a value is date-like with potential ambiguity. `02/03/2020` would pass.

##### `is_date_format(format)`__

Check whether a column matches a specified date format. Formats can be specified as any date like this:

```
September 17, 2012, 10:10:09
oct. 7, 70
8/8/1965 12:00:00 AM
2006-01-02T15:04:05+0000
2014-04-26
```

```
date_of_birth: is_date_format("June 10, 1987")
```

See [araddon/dateparse](https://github.com/araddon/dateparse/blob/master/example/main.go#L12) for more examples.

__Important!__ You need to escape date values containing dashes using brackets (`[]`) or a double backslash (`\\`). For example `2020-02-10` is escaped like this:

```yaml
collection_date: is_date_format("[2020-02-10]")
collection_date: is_date_format("2020\\-02\\-10")
```

#### Files

##### `file_exists()`

Checks whether a file exists

##### `file_min_size(fsize)`

Checks whether a file is a minimum size

```yaml
photo: file_min_size("1MB")
```

`fsize` is a size string such as `100 mb`, `1G`, or `500`.

##### `mimetype(type)`

Validates the mimetype for a given file. See [gabriel-vasile/mimetype](https://github.com/gabriel-vasile/mimetype/blob/master/supported_mimes.md) for available mimetypes.

```yaml
photo: mimetype("image/jpeg")
```

## Notes

`still` is largely influenced by [csv-validate](http://digital-preservation.github.io/csv-validator/), but offers more flexibility when validating tabular data.
